---
  layout: post
  title: Tires and ice dont make for a good mix
  author: Joe Schwarcz
  source: McGill Blogs
---
  HYPERLINK
"http://blogs.mcgill.ca/oss/2014/01/10/tires-and-ice-dont-make-for-a-goo
d-mix/"  Tires and ice don’t make for a good mix 

  Ice is great in a beverage or on a skating rink but we don’t want it
on our streets. How do we melt it? Potassium acetate, sodium chloride,
calcium chloride, magnesium chloride or  urea will do the job. They all
interfere with the formation of ice crystals and can be used to melt
ice.  They do, however, differ in effectiveness, potential harm to the
environment and cost.

Sodium chloride, or common salt, is cheap and can melt ice down to about
-20C.  At lower temperatures salt can be mixed with “beet juice”
which is actually the molasses left behind when sugar is produced from
sugar beets. Mixing salt with beet juice allows less salt to be used
which results in a “greener” process since salt can damage soil and
vegetation, contaminate surface and ground water and speed up the
corrosion of concrete and metals.  Corrosion of metals is a process
whereby the metal react with oxygen.  This requires the transfer of
electrons among substances and such transfer is facilitated by the
presence of ions, such as sodium and chloride.  Substances that
dissolve to form ions in solution are called electrolytes and speed up
the rusting process.  That’s why cars in Canada rust and those in
Arizona do not.  That is also why airplanes not in use are stored in
the Arizona desert.

Not all electrolytes speed up corrosion to the same extent.  Potassium
acetate is much more environmentally friendly than salt but is twenty
times more expensive.  Calcium chloride melts snow and ice much faster
than sodium chloride, is less corrosive but does damage vegetation and
wildlife.  It also costs more than salt.  Magnesium chloride is also
less corrosive, but works only down to -15C and costs five times more
than salt.  Urea is non-corrosive, does not damage vegetation but only
melts ice down to -4C.  There is yet another issue with salt.  It
works more effectively if the grains can be prevented from clumping. 
To reduce caking, small amounts of sodium ferrocyanide are added.  In
the presence of sunlight, this can break down and release cyanide which
can be washed into waterways and damage aquatic life.

Ethlylene glycol or propylene glycol are the substances used to de-ice
airplanes because they are non-corrosive.  These liquids are collected
and recycled but some is inevitably lost to the environment.  Obviously
there is no perfect way to melt ice and snow.  But not using these
substances would result in loss of life.  As with so many scientific
issues, it is a question of evaluating risk versus benefit.

Joe Schwarcz – Jan 10th/2014

