---
  layout: post
  title: Why does coffee heated up in the microwave foam up when sugar is added
  author: Joe Schwarcz
  source: McGill Blogs
---
  HYPERLINK
"http://blogs.mcgill.ca/oss/2013/06/16/why-does-coffee-heated-up-in-the-
microwave-foam-up-when-sugar-is-added/"  Why does coffee heated up in
the microwave foam up when sugar is added? 

  This is due to a phenomenon known as superheating. But first, we have
to understand what boiling is all about. At the surface of a liquid
molecules are always evaporating. If we leave a glass of water out, it
will eventually disappear. If we heat the liquid, its molecules move
faster, become more energetic and more molecules go into the vapour
phase. As a consequence, the liquid disappears more quickly. At the
boiling point, molecules all over the liquid, not only at the surface
are energetic enough to go into the vapour phase. They do this most
readily by evaporating into airspaces that exist in the container. All
containers have imperfections where air gets entrapped when a liquid is
introduced. As these air pockets fill with vapour, they expand and begin
to rise. That is why we see streams of bubbles which originate at the
sides or the bottom of the container. Now, in a microwave oven, the
container is not heated, only the water. Since the container stays cool
it actually cools the liquid that is in contact with it, meaning that
the liquid in the center is always hotter, sometimes by as much as 10
degrees C. But the liquid in the center cannot boil, because there are
no air bubbles for it to evaporate into. By the time the liquid near the
edge of the container reaches the boiling point, the liquid in the
middle is considerably hotter; it is superheated. The addition of sugar
or a tea bag now can spur vigorous boiling. This is because the surface
imperfections introduce trapped air bubbles into which the superheated
liquid vaporizes. Accidents can be prevented by putting a plastic spoon
into the mug or glass while it is heating in the microwave. So now go
and experiment. But take care!

 

Joe Schwarcz – June 16th/2013

